Okay, this is Ron Shorin at the American Astronaut
Society meeting in Berkeley, California on June
9, 1993. I'm going to interview Don Wells. So, Don,
for the record, would you give us your full name? My
name is Donald C. Wells. That's how I usually use my
name professionally. I'm 51 years old. I was born
in 1941. Where? In Texas. I'm a native Texan from
Beaumont, Texas. I entered graduate school in
astronomy. Let's just go back. I wanted to ask you,
where you got first interested in astronomy? Oh,
now there's an interesting question. Actually, I
don't know. I grew up in the 50s reading Heinlein
and other science fiction writers. was really
fascinated by space and that sort of thing. But
actually, I think the interest goes deeper. And I
was always after kind of ultimate things and the
limits. And in fact, the result of that is in
astronomy, I went toward cosmology. So for me, I
viewed planets as one little step along the way,
and I was really after cosmology. That was how I
originally thought. And so I gravitated in that
direction. But actually, as a young person, I
didn't know anything about how people became
astronomers.
And so as I was in high school and I studied physics,
then I knew about physics. I also grew up in a heavy
industry area. And so engineers were the highly
honored people in that environment.
Intellectuals were unknown. And so the highest
goal was to be an engineer. And the net effect of
that was when I went off to university education, I
thought the object of the game was to be an
engineer. Where did you do your undergraduate
work? I went to Rice. And I started in EE. And this
would have been 1960. I graduated from high school
in 1960. And so I originally started in double E.
And in a freshman physics course, I became
terrifically fascinated with Newtonian physics
and all the basic physics stuff. And that just
resonated real deeply. And so I switched to
physics. And however, I have all through my life
thought and acted a lot like an engineer in many
ways. So I'm a kind of hybrid person in between
engineering and physics. But my real love is
physics in the end. When you graduated, where did
you go to grad school? I graduated in 1964. I
applied to two places for grad school. I should
have applied for more. I must say that as a physics
major, as I approached my senior year, I actually
came to the realization that I didn't really want
to do what most physicists did. And I was groping
around, and I had an astrophysics course in about
my senior year, junior year, senior year. And I
didn't actually know anything about how to be an
astronomer. And that's an interesting
commentary, that I was a physics student in the
60s, early 60s, and there was essentially at that
time almost no information available to me about
how to become an astronomer. One of my professors,
he was a department chairman at the time, I asked
him, and he had a fellow grad student when he was in
school who had become an astronomer. And so he had
some knowledge of what you did to be an astronomer.
And he gave me a few hints. And with that, I was off
and running. I right away discovered where the
grad schools were and applied. Texas offered me
money. The other place I applied didn't offer me
money, although it was Wisconsin, as it happens.
In retrospect, had I gone to Wisconsin, I almost
certainly would have been in the OAO program. They
would have paid me in the end, and I would have wound
up doing probably ultraviolet astronomy, and who
knows? I'd have gone into the space side of
astronomy more directly. Instead, I went to Texas
and went into the ground-based side of astronomy.
So it's one of those little things, you know, flip
of the coin, you'd go one way or the other. When I
went to Texas, one of my very first courses was from
Gerard de Vaucouleur. And it was on extragalactic
astronomy. And I just gravitated right to that.
And Gerard had a planetary side as well. And he was,
even then, at that time, doing, for example, a map
of Mars, as I recall. He had an artist busy drawing
maps of visual observations of Mars at that time.
Anyway, you were starting to ask a question. What
did you do your thesis on? Oh, you mean in grad
school? Yeah. Actually, I did two theses, or tried
two different things. I started on a thesis on blue
galaxies as Mercurian-type galaxies with Dan
Weidman, who was a young professor then at I guess
he was an assistant professor in the Department of
Texas. And he decided right in the midst of that to
take a position at Penn State. So he got a tenure
track offer at Penn State. And off he goes to Penn
State. And I decided not to follow him. I decided to
stay at Texas. At that point, I gave up on the
original thesis. It wasn't working out too well
anyway. The universe wasn't cooperating. And so
Gerard offered me a suggestion, and I went with
Gerard, and I did spectrophotometry of galaxies
to get K corrections, and that was cosmology. I was
directly a part of observational cosmology, so I
was really an observational cosmology person.
And I wound up doing a postdoc in that, But my other
big love was computing. So all through the midst of
all this, I had a really heavy interest in
computing. Totally self-taught, but at a very
high level. And so ultimately, my whole career has
been divided between science and computing. And
computing is mostly one over the years. I remember
you were in the bowels of the 107-inch when that
thing was getting going. What did you do on that
project? I was a co-designer, builder,
programmer, of the control software for the
107-inch, pointing the machine and moving it
around, get it on targets, doing pointing
calculations, that sort of thing. I had a partner
who was a long-time friend of mine named Mike
McCants. He and I did that project. an early
computer-controlled telescope in optical
astronomy. In Harlan's tapes and transcripts,
Harlan Smith, he states that Westinghouse
completely fouled up the control system and
people had to basically start from scratch. He may
be speaking of things like the servos and that sort
of thing. And I seem to recall that he had an
engineer who did build a digital servo system for
the telescope, and that that was a somewhat
innovative thing in that time. Now, that's the
actual servo controls. We were at a higher level,
so if you wanted to observe Venus, we built a
control system where you could say, point Venus,
and it would work out an ephemeris, calculate the
current apparent position, apply all the
corrections for the telescope's pointing
errors, and command the servo system to move the
machine to that position and set the tracking
rates so that it would track the moving target. So
we could work out all those kind of higher-level
calculations. That's what I mean by the control
system. But an engineer who was responsible for
the servos, for motor control, would think that it
was the digital servo loops. That may be what
Harlan was referring to. I don't think our part of
the project was something that Westinghouse
would have ever been responsible for. It was
always going to be our job. So once the mechanical
end of the telescope was done, then you people took
over. Yeah. Yes. It was a pure software effort.
Although we were concerned about the pointing
errors, the mechanical errors of the machine,
which are inevitable, and calibrating those and
accounting for them. The reason I'm interested in
this is, of course, that that was funded with NASA
money. Yes. Through planetary astronomy. Right.
One of the most innovative things we did in that
software, which is almost unmatched, I think,
elsewhere, was that we had an ability to point at
targets on the moon. There's practically no other
telescope control system that ever did. I've
never actually heard of one that did that. But
because of the Lunar Laser Ranging Program, it was
necessary to hit targets at points on the moon,
accounting for current lunar ephemeris. Where is
the moon, and what is its orientation, and where
are we? where are the features, or where is the
reflection? Yeah, right. So we had xi, eta
coordinates in the coordinate system of the moon.
So you could pick out a crater on the moon, and you'd
look up at xi, eta coordinates, and you could say,
point moon xi, eta, you know, xi this, eta that. So
you'd say where on the moon you wanted to go, and we
had named features, and we had a table. I think we
had named features for some of the objects on the
moon, and you had a table of their coordinates, so
you could say, point at them by name on the moon, you
know, a crater by name. And that was really pretty
exotic to do a calculation of where the objects
would be in apparent coordinates and also their
tracking rates. And then the next part of the story
is that many of the targets you wanted to fire at
were on the dark side of the moon, so you couldn't
even see them. And you had unknown pointing errors
because in spite of all our efforts to calibrate
the machine, there's uncalibratable errors. So
what you do is you offset from a visible source to
the invisible source. And so, in fact, what we
would do is point at a bright object, an object on
the bright side, the illuminated side, zero the
crosshairs on it. tell the computer, now note the
zero error, now go to this other guy that's over
here in the dark, in the shadow, and that's where
they were going to fire the laser. And we could do
all this in the summer of 1969 at Apollo 11. As I
recall at that time, there were a number of other
observatories that were trying to do the same
thing, and they did not have this kind of control
system, and eventually some of them got returns.
um laser returns but as i recall they kind of once
they got their picture in the paper they kind of
gave up because it was just too hard to do without
this control system that you had maybe it was maybe
it was i i'm on i i didn't know much about that
because we were just support personnel for the
activity we thought my partner and i mike mckenzie
and i thought it was a wonderful fascinating
control and computing problem And we were in
uncharted territory, and we loved it because we
knew we could do it. We believed it was all going to
work, and it did, and it was all a fascinating
problem for us. But we ourselves weren't all that
interested in planetary work. We viewed the whole
thing as an interesting logical problem,
mathematical and physical problem to stretch our
minds on. On the other hand, it would have been very
difficult to do routine lunar ranging work or
routine Venus stuff without this control system.
Did anybody, the people who used the stuff you
made, did they ever give you any credit in print? I
do not know. I do not know. Because it's my theory
that people like you and Bob Toll and John Geary and
CFA and everybody like that do all this stuff
without which, quote, observers can't observe.
And you're invisible people as far as that works
out. There's a lot of truth to this. Like, that
lunar laser ranging data is mostly going to appear
in a table in some A.J. or some other journal,
probably under the author of Daryl Mulholland,
somebody like that. And it's going to appear as a
set of precision results and model fits and that
sort of thing. And that's the ultimate result of
it. And along the way, you know, he just announces
this came from the 107 inch and probably doesn't
say much more than that. And I mean, how can I fault
him? This has been standard practice forever. Do
you get to publish some of this stuff in like the
Journal for Computer Control of Telescopes or
whatever? Not in that era. Nowadays,
well, in the last decade or so, there is more of a
mechanism. First, for example, in the AAS,
there's a thing called the Working Group for
Astronomical Software, which was first proposed
by Ivan King when he was president of the society in
1980. And I was the first chairman of that working
group. For about five years, I was chairman of it.
And one of the goals of that group was to provide a
forum where astronomical software people could
get together and talk and get some kind of
recognition. And over the years, the WGAS has
promoted, particularly under Bob Hennish, who's
the current chairman, promoted some of this kind
of activity of journal recognition, paper
publication. So in this AAS meeting on Monday,
there were poster paper sessions that were WGAS
related, and there was a paper session, oral paper
session on Monday morning that was WGAS related.
And in it, software people in astronomy got to talk
about what they were doing. But this is a
continuing problem. We haven't really solved it.
Also, it's true that under this era of the last
decade with Bob Hanisch, and not just WGS, but
equivalent groups in Europe, for example, have
also recognized the problem, and they've
pestered the journals, the publication
committees, and there's been a broadening of the
guidelines of what's publishable, what is
considered appropriate for our journals. And so
in principle, the policies in print now say that
instrumentation papers of this kind, including
software things, not just optical instruments.
Somebody could always publish a paper on a new
spectrometer. but software sort of arose in the
more recent period and they weren't quite sure how
we fit into the picture. Well, now the policies say
that these things are publishable. And so it's not
finished. The solution's not completely in hand,
but there's a lot of improvement. This situation
really never arose in radio astronomy because if
you had some new deal, you would publish it in the
proceedings of the IRE. The software people...
No, I'm not so sure I agree. The hardware people,
yes. They had a long tradition on the hardware
side. So if they built a new receiver, they could
certainly publish it in an engineering journal.
There's comparatively little papers on the
software side of systems. And that's somewhat
true even today, that there's still not a full
recognition for software as a form of
instrumentation. That's really the issue that
you're coming to. And in fact, that's the way I view
it. I view software as a form of instrumentation
And in the last two decades, it's become sine qua
non, just like all the other instrumentation. And
in fact, this is generally agreed to and
understood. But however, the tradition of
publishing papers around it is not as fully
developed as it ought to be. The software is kind of
amorphous. It's mind stuff, ultimate mind stuff.
It's not tangible objects. Tangible objects are
easy to write about. Amorphous mind stuff is
slippery. You can't pin it down exactly. Even with
hardware, as you know, Bob Tull was so busy
building equipment for people like me to use.
among others, that he was refused tenure because
he didn't write enough papers about the sky. And
that's with hard work, OK, which was a better
position than software. And I'll say one thing for
Harlan that he realized that without Bob Tall, the
conservatory would be in some trouble. I was a
member of the first generation that had this
problem on the software side. I made a decision.
While I was in grad school, actually, I decided
that the main thing that I could do for science was
to specialize in information handling. In that
era, that was a pretty... foolhardy
decision to make, although it was a straight
calculation on my part of what the future was going
to bring. The calculation was dead accurate. I was
right on the mark. I knew what was going to happen.
All my predictions were basically correct.
However, I also knew that meant that I wasn't
tenure-tracked. And I understood that
consequence of the calculation, too. And
although I made a half-hearted attempt to go for
tenure, kind of, to play the academic game, I
wasn't really capable of being simultaneously a
bona fide research scientist and also a software
instrumentation person. It was just too much. I
wasn't good enough. Do you think this is a hangover
from the days of, like, Galileo and Herschel, when
an astronomer did everything? He built his
telescope, he observed, he did this, did that.
Back when it was easier to do that, of course. I
agree with you that you can't do it these days. OK.
It's too hard. So I ultimately gave up on, I gave up
mentally on the idea of going for tenure. I
acknowledged that I was never going to get it. I
actually had no idea how I was going to survive
because When I entered graduate school, there was
no mechanism of employment in astronomy that
could find a way for you to have a position, a
permanent position, that wasn't tenure track.
You alluded to Bob. He had exactly the same
problem. And yet, he became a research associate
and was put on the observatory payroll and, as a
practical matter, had tenure, although
officially he didn't. Personally, one result of
all this is that I'm kind of scornful of the notion
of academic tenure and think that oftentimes it's
given to people who then sit around for another 20
years. Whereas folk like Bob and me sort of have to
continually re-justify our existence. When one
project ends, there's probably another one
coming, and we'll have to once again prove
ourselves. And it's a little bit of a strain. One
gets tired of it after a while. But on the other
hand, there's also a sense of fairness about it.
The notion of academic tenure, I'm not all that
fond of the notion. I think the arguments for it are
a little self-serving. But anyway, people like
Bob Toll on the instrumentation side and me on the
software instrumentation side did have a problem
with how... The fundamental way of saying the
problem was there weren't job titles for us. If you
just looked in the roster of job titles that the
personnel office had, there wasn't any box to put
us into. And this was recognized by the
observatories. It was understood that in this era
of high-tech systems, large-scale systems that
were complex, involved a lot of technologies, and
there was rapid evolution of the technologies, it
was understood that you were going to have to have a
cadre of technical people who were in the
structure more or less permanently, and that you
just simply weren't going to operate without
them. And so the administrators came to the
conclusion they had to create some new job titles,
and they did. Bob, I think, was always a research
associate, but for software people like me, there
weren't any job titles. Actually, big
institutions really did have the problem even for
the hardware guys. There were people like me who
were bona fide astronomers, who did read the table
of contents of the AppJ as it came on the shelf every
month, who understood the physics and the
astronomy and actually did care about it a lot. but
who were, in fact, systems people. And
observatories had to make decisions about that.
And in the US, I was one of the first people to get a
new job title. It was Support Scientist was the
name given for it. And what institution? This was
at Kitt Peak National Observatory. When did you
leave Texas? I graduated from Texas in September
of 72. That was when I had my oral exam. And I was at
Texas eight years. I was in grad school eight
years. That was a long, long time. One reason was an
aborted dissertation that only started and
didn't go too far. The second reason was that
throughout the eight years, I worked half time. In
fact, I built a telescope control system, which is
not the sort of thing you'd expect a grad student to
do. I built half a dozen or more instrument control
systems. It may have been eight or ten of them. I did
a whole series of projects. I had substantial
published papers. I'd done almost every kind of
computing, data reduction, instrument control,
telescope control. I'd even done astrophysics
calculations, stark broadening functions with a
kind of theoretical approach. paper where I was
the computing person. So I'd done all kinds of
computing, and I'd been employed as a computing
person for eight years throughout the time I was in
grad school, which is a large part of the reason why
I was in grad school a very long time. So I graduated
in 72, September of 72, and I went to Kitt Peak as a
postdoc, and
I was doing cosmology observations, but they were
at that time bringing the Mayall 4 meter online,
and they actually didn't have very many people
with skills like mine. One of the reasons they'd
hired me was they wanted to get my kind of skills
because they knew they needed them. And so I just
gravitated into the Mayall 4 meter. I was the
software designer on the control system for the
Mayall 4 meter, the first original control
system. So you got your new title, what, after a
year? Yeah, they acknowledged that they had to
invent a new title. So I became a support
scientist, and I spent nine years at Kitt Peak. I
was a software designer, built image processing
systems, instrument control systems, data
reduction software. I did a little bit of just
about everything. And there were two other
people. There was an infrared instrumentation
person who got the title at the same time. Who was
that?
Joyce, Dick Joyce. He's still an infrared
instrument person, but he was also a person who was
plenty competent and knowledgeable in
astronomy, but apparently was never going to make
it in tenure track, and yet you just couldn't run.
You couldn't run an observatory without him. You
needed his people, so they acknowledged this. The
third person, I think, was Ingemar Furinlid,
who's now, I believe, in Georgia. I believe he was
the third one at the time. I remember there were
three of us, and he was an optical spectroscopy
person, high-resolution spectroscopy person,
so he was doing photography and spectrographs and
that sort of thing. Once again, a specialist in
instrument management. Now, big observatories
like NOAO, Kitpeak NOAO, or NREO, are full of
people with this title. And at NREO, the... In
fact, NREO has now largely obliterated the
distinctions in the job titles. They still have a
notion of tenure, but my title is now associate
scientist and it's logically equivalent to
associate professor, but I'm not a tenured, not
strictly speaking, tenured. When did you leave
Kitt Peak and why? I left in 1981.
Well, there was a lot of administrative
turbulence at Kitt Peak in those years. And I was in
a, well, people like me who are in a support role
wind up getting assigned to technical divisions
who do not necessarily have sympathy for the fact
that we are also scientists. And as a scientist,
I'm trained as an independent researcher, and I'm
trained to be an independent thinker. And I'm just
naturally a rather ornery and intellectually
independent person. That's the nature of it. Only
people like us ever get to the top and get a PhD. So
there's a terrific selection effect there.
necessarily a good person to be told what to do and
then to
be put into a technical division and put under
technical management if that technical
management isn't astute enough to realize what's
going on you can get problems created so Anyway,
there was turbulence in the computing division at
that time, a lot of change of personnel, a lot of
policy problems. There was generally a lot of
turbulence at Kitt Peak in that era. Jeff Burbage
was director. There was a lot of controversy
around. And anyway, they appointed somebody over
me who insulted me on the day he was appointed. so I
decided I would leave. I'd about had enough. I'd
been there nine years anyway, and I was getting a
little tired of what I'd been doing, and prospects
didn't look too good with a lot of controversy
going on, so I called up one of my friends and 60 days
later moved to NREO. So I've I've continued doing
more or less the same thing, software systems. And
I generally define myself as being interested in
information handling in astronomy,
observational astronomy research. So I'm
interested in the support of observational
astronomy research. And information for me is
everything from photons in the sky to ink on a
journal page. I originally was mostly interested
in things like cosmology, but as the years have
gone by, my view of the universe has broadened a
lot, and I'm now totally panchromatic in my view.
and my old disdain for things like planets is all
gone now. And so I view all of astronomy as one big
thing that's all valuable. All kinds of planetary
astronomers spun. Planetary, stellar,
extra-galactic astronomers, they all sponge off
of you, right? Well, I guess. I'm just saying that I
myself no longer have the prejudices I had as a
young fellow. That's what I was going to ask you.
Back when you were in grad school, did you
notice... a sneering disdain on the part of real
astronomers for Planetary One?
Yeah. There's no question it existed. And I've
effectively confessed to it, to being a part of it,
although I certainly earned money off of
planetary astronomy in those days. It's a fact
that that the NASA money had to fund planetary
astronomy and had to deliberately subsidize it on
ground-based astronomy in particular as an
adjunct to the space program. I'm sure that was
necessary. And even today, I suppose a lot of the
funding of planetary work is strictly NASA money,
even now. 95%. Yeah. And what I've also said to you,
though, is that I personally, I can't speak for
anybody else, but I personally no longer have this
prejudice. But that's something that came to me
over the years. I was also strictly an optical
person, and I thought only cosmology mattered.
and I have a much broader view of science now. It's
interesting that you would have that early view
being at McDonald, being at the University of
Texas at McDonald, which was one of the few places,
actually the only place with a really large
telescope or telescopes that were the major
portion of the time to planetary observance.
Sure. It is a little unusual. I could easily have
gone into planetary work. When I was nearing my
completion of my degree, I seriously considered
going to JPL. In effect, I got an invitation to go to
JPL. In fact, they really wanted me to go, not
bother to finish my degree. They want you to work on
radars or what? Well, the person who was making the
effort was Reinhold Beer, who had brought his big
Fourier transform spectrometer to the 107-inch,
And I had been around, and we had talked a lot, and he
had seen me, and so he essentially attempted to
recruit a computing person for JPL. And I was well
aware of what he was doing, and I was well aware that
I'd be entering the space program, planetary
work, and all that. And I did seriously consider
it. I even traveled to JPL, thought about it a lot,
but decided to finish my degree under de
Vaucouleur. And I did. And so that was, once again,
the fork in the road. One could have decided, and
there was a case where the planetary money almost
captured me. NASA money almost captured me. Do you
find radio astronomers different to work with
than optical astronomers?
That's a good question, Ron. One can give several
kinds of answers. Single-dish radio astronomers
are psychologically pretty similar to optical
astronomers, and they're somewhat ornery and
competitive, and they have some problems in
cooperating. whereas large-scale
interferometric radio astronomy tends to be more
of a community activity, and there is a tendency to
be somewhat more cooperative, and that's
especially true in VOBI. The VOBI guys are
basically very easy to get along with, because if
they're not, they got selected out of the field,
since VOBI could only operate on a cooperative
basis. I'm very aware of this. I just spent five
years working with BLBI people. That's a very long
baseline interferometry. Exactly. Which NASA is
now putting a lot of money into with the Radio
Astron VSOP program, which is coming out of JPL.
And I'm very impressed with how they get along with
each other. Whereas in optical astronomy,
there's always been fierce rivalries between
observatories And you can see it even in the big NSF
projects. You can see it in the panel, the tenure
panel cycles. You can see these kind of fierce
rivalries. You can see it right now in the Jiminy
project. The radio guys mostly have had a tendency
to do their debates in private, get their act
together, and present a united front, which is how
they could build a VLA and a VLBA and other large
projects like that. Another reason I'm
mentioning that is I was originally going to be a
radio astronomer, and eventually did do some
radio astronomy. But because of my training in
graduate school, I didn't have a prejudice
against planetary astronomy. There never was a
prejudice against planetary work in radio. and i
wonder if it was because both fields were looked on
as pariahs by possessors of large telescopes it
may be something in what you say i i think it's also
true well let me say i think it's also true that the
radio guys are sort of mentally very flexible they
were always dealing with strange stuff and so they
were willing to entertain new thoughts new ideas
and and somewhat exotic ideas, because they were
always dealing with somewhat exotic things by
traditional astronomy standards, whereas to do
cosmology was a part of a kind of grand
intellectual tradition. And Hubble and on and on
like this. You were dealing with the grandest
things. You had the feeling that Einstein was here
and so on. This was the grandest scale of activity.
Also, the prestige of the big California
institutions had a lot to do with this, because
they had stressed this kind of program,
especially Hubble. The whole heritage of Hubble
and his successors was a powerful intellectual
standard that tended towards setting up the style
for what was the best. I think in a way, while I agree
with it all, it's also kind of distorted our view of
the universe. And I have confessed to you that over
the years I've changed and broadened my view. I no
longer take cosmology quite as seriously as I used
to, although it's still my ultimate basic
interest in the universe. Did you ever get the
feeling that you were considered second-rate
because you got a degree from UT University of
Texas instead of, say, Harvard or Michigan or
Caltech?
The year I entered Texas, the number of students
doubled. The next year it doubled again. I entered
in 64. Harlan had come to Texas in 63. This was an
extraordinary growth rate in the department. It
was change, change, change. It was instability.
It was a department that had no reputation. It came
out of nothing, very much in the Texas style. And
so... I certainly was well aware that I was coming
from an institution that didn't have name
recognition. However, by the time I graduated
eight years later, already the department had a
recognition. For example, one of the graduates
during that period in the class that I was in that
entered in September of 64 was Beatrice Tinsley.
And Beatrice Tinsley's reputation is as high as it
comes. past tense of course she died so some years
ago so she was she was in the same classes that i was
in in the fall of 64 and immediately it was apparent
her intellectual superiority but another person
who was in the class was bob harrington who went to
the naval observatory he also just died in january
yes very very recently he was in the same class i was
in also intellectually very high but that you know
there were there were others who were in the
program. So the program did manage to get good
people. Most of them ultimately got employed. I
must say the Texas program produced a lot of people
who stayed in astronomy, who concentrated on
getting the job done, and they are all over the
world now. Everywhere I go today, I meet people who
were in Texas. The field is full of astronomy
grads. So in many ways, the degree has more value as
every year passes because of that. Of course,
another program that was like that was Arizona. In
the same period of time, Arizona had tremendous
growth. So both of those institutions came up out
of nowhere and created new traditions that now are
reputable. How much do you think that NASA money
had to do with that in the case of the University of
Texas? It built the 107-inch. It funded a number of
other key people who came to Texas in that era. But
even more than that, I think viewed in a large
historic perspective, the whole business of the
Sputnik scare, which led to a concentration on
science education and science research
there was a vast amount of money spent by the U.S. in
the whole infrastructure of scientific
research, and it wasn't just NASA money. It was NSF
money and other money sources. So there was a whole
concerted effort to build research and new
research groups, new instrumentation of all
kinds. NASA money was a huge part of that.
Incidentally, I spent a summer working on the
Apollo program. I'm very proud that I spent a
summer in Houston. I did a tiny little part of it.
I'm sure my stuff was irrelevant. I did a Monte
Carlo study of the probability that a proton flare
would roast the astronauts while they were in
flight. So it was strictly a statistical
calculation. That's what I did for a couple of
months. But I was very proud to have had a small part
of Apollo. Now, that's an example where NASA money
It was employing a lot of people. I wasn't the only
one. So there were a lot of us who were involved, and
it was the whole stimulus of a vast NASA budget
pouring into engineering and into scientific
research. But it wasn't just NASA money, and that
spirit degraded somewhat in the 70s. By the time I
graduated, that money flux was out, and there were
a number of my fellow students who had trouble
finding positions in the 70s. I did not because I
was a technology person, and technology was hot
stuff in the 70s. So I didn't have a job problem, but
some of my fellow grad students for a few years did.
Let's see. Here's an off-the-wall question. When
you meet people on airplanes or something who are
not astronomers or scientists, and you tell them
what you do, what's their reaction? Well,
standard question number one is, have you heard
from them lately, or some question like that.
Well, I mean, do they think that astronomers are
parasites, or do they think that we ought to be,
that it's a good deal that we have some astronomers
in this country, or what? Some people... some
people simply don't see the point. And I actually
have problems with one of my uncles who apparently
has never really understood the justification
for science in general, but certainly astronomy.
Are we parasites? Yes, the answer is yes, of course
we are. My standard statement is that for at least
4,000 years there have been astronomers on
government payrolls. And I feel That's
personally how I feel about it, that I'm a part of a
very long-term tradition. The intellectual and
political leadership of the world, of almost
every society in the world, historically, over at
least 4,000 years, have all thought that some
fraction of their money should go into supporting
people like us. Isn't that, I mean, do you agree
with me? Yes, yes. I mean, it's a fact. Good enough
for Galileo, it's good enough for me. It's a
historic fact, you know. So some Babylonian
astronomer, he may have been doing what we call
astrology today, but that was what passed for
professional astronomy in that era. And
intellectually, he was a person not unlike us. as
much like us as he could be in the culture of 4,000
years ago. I'll give you another example. I was
speaking to Paul Hodge yesterday, who's an AJ
editor in the department at University of
Washington in Seattle, and he was remarking that
he had found in his library copies of volume one of
the of the A.J. in 1840-something,
1850-something. And I was speaking about, but
your department couldn't have started until
somewhat later, 20 years later or something, or
couldn't possibly have had this collection. So he
started saying, well, yeah, it's true. Shortly
after the state was formed, a committee of people
had to get together to decide what they were going
to do with their new society, their culture being
created in the wilderness. And so they would
create a university. What should this university
teach? Well, let's see, it should teach
literature and it should teach astronomy.
Astronomy? Once again, here you see this historic
fact that human beings recognize that up there
above the sky, above the air, the atmosphere, is
something that is of fundamental importance. and
that human culture, society, has to take
cognizance of it and that it's appropriate to pay
some of us to spend our lives trying to sort it out
and interpret it. So I think that was just one
little story, but I think it fits into this grand
tradition that we are a part of. Do you think
planetary astronomy is a part of astronomy? I
regard it as such.
It's also a part of geophysics, geology. That's
certainly true, and I'm sure the meteorological
people would see affinities to their disciplines
as well. So planetary sits in a crack between the
earth sciences and the space sciences. Certainly
the kind of plasma physics that goes on in the solar
system has strong analogies and relationships to
plasma physics elsewhere in the universe.
Likewise, We still don't fully understand
angular momentum questions in the formations of
solar systems, the overall heavy metal flows,
where the heavy metals go and where they come from.
Planetary has relationships to all of those. I
think if you take a large-scale view of what our
science is all about, planetary science plays an
integral role in it. However, there is a big
distinction being a remote sensing science,
which we are. I feel great affinity to remote
sensing people like we're doing EOS and Earth
observation systems because we're also a remote
sensing science. The big distinction, though, is
they actually get some of the time to get ground
truth. to calibrate their remote sensing effort.
Planetary sciences, because of the planetary
missions, get ground truth also. But the kind of
astronomy I've spent most of my life working on
never gets ground truth. And that's a distinction
that's pretty clear cut.
Let me ask a question that has to do with planetary
astronomy, but all kinds of astronomy. In the last
couple of decades, we've seen a number of
subdivisions of the American astronomical site.
It used to just be one American astronomical site.
Now you have historical and high energy and
planetary and solar. And their own journals. Is
that good or bad? Or
just inevitable? I don't think it's necessarily
surprising whether it's a bad thing or not. I have
trouble deciding. You actually didn't mention
another one that I'm aware of because of my
employment in radio astronomy. Radio
astronomers are more interested in going to an
ERSE meeting. Although you'll see plenty of them
giving papers here at the AAS meeting. They are
here, but most astronomers, most non-radio
astronomers, don't realize that the radio guys
have their own their own environment that's
independent of the AAS. And that's the URSI there,
radio science. Radio scientific international.
Yeah, right, right, right. Recently, a lot of
people, both optical and radio astronomers, have
been getting a lot of publicity and, I guess, money
from topics such as the search for
extraterrestrial intelligence, killer
asteroids and comets, looking for other solar
systems. Right. All in the ozone layer. Right. Are
they overdoing that? You mean, are we as a society
overdoing it by putting money into those efforts?
No, are astronomers putting too much emphasis on
that stuff? Or is it worth it? Well, that's the
question. As a society, should we be putting money
into those kinds of research? Is that your
question? Yeah, and should astronomers be doing
that? We're as good as anybody else with our remote
sensing attitudes and our technology. We have the
right technology. And we have the right
attitudes. We're as good scientists to be doing it
as anybody else. And it's not, in that sense,
inappropriate.
Now,
personally, SETI is this fascinating subject
where one isn't quite sure what probabilities to
assign to it. Is it a waste of time is a really tough
question because most Most of us who are trying to
pick a research program to work on, we do a
calculation of the odds we're going to succeed in
finding something interesting.